Division of Clinical Genetics 
CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL OF NEW YORK 

3959 Broadway CH7N-718, New York, NY 10032 

(212) 305-6731 ♦ (212) 305-9058 FAX 

 
 

Patient Name: John Mickel 
MRN: 7921283 
DOB: 6/16/1985 
 
07/17/2017 

 Clinical Genetics Initial Evaluation in the DISCOVER Program 

Reason for Consult:  
Mr. Mickel is a 31yo male with a history of longstanding GI issues including poor weight gain, 
chronic abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. He has had comprehensive genetic testing 
revealing for several variants of uncertain significance and would like clarification regarding the 
significance of these test results. He is referred to the DISCOVER indirectly by Dr. Robert Karp 
and traveled from California for the appointment. The session was conducted with genetic 
counselor, Ilana Chilton. 
 
History of Present Illness:  
As a baby, Mr. Mickel reports a history of vomiting after breastfeeding and FTT. Since 
childhood, he has had significant issues gaining weight despite adequate caloric intake, though 
his height has always remained on the curve. As a child, he reports a history of nausea, stomach 
aches and an overall aversion to food. He remembers having minimal muscle mass and being 
easily fatigued.  
 
His GI issues became more severe in his 20’s when he began to have daily lower abdominal pain 
characterized by burning and nausea. He also began to have abdominal distension with minimal 
food intake. He was diagnosed with visceral hypersensitvitiy. During his 20’s he also developed 
chronic vomiting daily and vomited as many as 5 times per day. He had extensive workup 
including multiple EGDs, small bowel xray series, CT enterography, capsule endoscopy, nuclear 
gastric emptying studies and antral duodenal motility study. Findings have been notable for 
delayed gastric emptying, question of gastroparesis based on antral duodenal motility study, 
duodenal ulcer, and mild increase in IELs on full thickness jejunal biopsy. He saw an ENT to 
address his vomiting was told that his uvula was causing the episodes and had it removed. Mr. 
Mickel reports that since then he no longer experiences vomiting, though it has not resolved his 
other GI issues.  
 
Currently his height is 5’10” and weight is 109lbs. The heaviest he has been is ~124lbs, which he 
reports was when he was frequently using cannabis and taking benzodiazepines. Due to his low 
weight he has very limited muscle mass and is easily fatigued. He reports pain and weakness in 
his knees and has had a couple disc herniations as well as shoulder dislocations. He has attempted 
to build muscle mass on occasion with lifting and protein, but this has not been successful due to 
GI issues and pain.  
 
 

Mr. Mickel has tried many medications including PPIs, H2 blocker, low dose E-Mycin, Baclofen, 
Cymbalta, Nortriptyline, Amitriptyline, Mirtazepine, Zofran, Remeron, Etopiride, Cinetopride, 
Lyrica, Gabapentin, Benzodiazepines, prednisone and IVIG. He reports that the benzodiazepines 
helped the most with his abdominal pain and burning, however, he did not like the other side 
effects and has not taken this medication for several years. He also tried adipose stem cells and 
had significant improvement in his muscle tone and mobility, but this wore off in a year. He also 
reports undergoing two fecal transplants that he administered to himself and were not overseen by 
a physician and he did not get any symptom relief.  
 
He has also had extensive biochemical evaluations and genetic testing. Biochemical evaluations 
in the past were revealing for increased urinary lactate. Serum markers have been inconsistent, 
with high ethylmalonic acid and mild metabolic alkalosis. Whole exome sequencing was 
revealing for multiple variants of uncertain significance as summarized below. Based on the 
variants in his ALDOB gene he was told that he might have HFI and abided by a strict diet for 
over a month with no improvement in symptoms.  
 
Review of systems is otherwise notable for frequent urination and constant pelvic discomfort. Mr. 
Mickel does not report pain when urinating, and instead reports burning pain in his abdomen. He 
has never had a full urology evaluation. He reports a history of frequent fungal infections on his 
chest and multiple plantar warts. He had a normal cardiology workup including normal echo and 
stress test.  
 
Summary of Previous Genetic Testing: 

1.  WES + mtDNA (GeneDx, 8/2016):  

  ALDOB, heterozygous (pathogenic): p.A150P, c.448 G>C  
  ALDOB, heterozygous (VUS): p. A163V, c.488 C>T  
  TTN, heterozygous (VUS): p.W19940X, c.59819 G>A 
  ACADS, homozygous (VUS): c.625G>A, p.Gly209ser  

 
2.  WES (Baylor, 1/2017):  

  ALDOB, heterozygous (pathogenic): p.A150P, c.448 G>C  
  ALDOB, heterozygous (VUS): p. A163V, c.488 C>T  
  TTN, heterozygous (VUS): p.W19940X, c.59819 G>A 
  TTN heterozygous (VUS): p.D14812V, c.44435A>T  
  Pharmacogenetic Profile: CYP1C19*17 heterozygous (Plavix, increased activity) 

 

3.  Global MAPS – Urine and Plasma (Baylor, 10/2016):  

  Several altered analytes likely associated with diet, nutrition, supplements or 

medication; not suggestive of a metabolic disorder. 
 

4.  Courtagen Testing (2016):  

  mtSEEK (mtDNA sequencing and deletion): Negative 
  nucSEEK (sequence analysis of nuclear mitochondrial genes): Several variants of 

uncertain significance were detected, notable variants as follows: 
i.  ACADS, homozygous (VUS): c.625G>A, p.Gly209ser  
ii.  RYR2, heterozygous (VUS): p.Asp446Asn, c.1336G>A (paternally 

inherited) 

 
Medications: Multivitamin 
 
Allergies: NKDA 

 

 
Social History: Uses cannabis recreationally, works from home. 
 
Family History (see pedigree): Mr. Mickel has one brother who is 29 years old, 5’4” and is in 
good health with no major medical concerns. His father is 79 years old and has a history of 
stroke. He has a paternal uncle who is thin and has GI issues and his one paternal cousin also has 
GI issues as well. Mr. Mickel’s mother is 65 eyars old with no major medical concerns. His 
maternal grandfather died of heart disease in his 50’s. There is no family history of 
cardiomyopathy, neurological issues, or known gastrointestinal conditions. Maternal ancestry is 
English and paternal ancestry is German and English; no known consanguinity.  
 
Review of Systems: 13-point review of systems negative except as noted below. 
General: FTT, low body weight 
Eyes: No issues 
ENT: S/p uvula surgery (removed) 
Cardiac: Normal echo, normal stress test 
Respiratory: No issues 
GI: Vomiting, nausea, chronic GI pain, delayed gastric emptying 
Urology: Frequent urination, pelvic pain 
MSK: Low muscle tone, weakness, recurrent dislocations of should, disc herniation 
Dermatology: Frequent fungal infections 
Neurology: Visceral hypersensitvitiy 
Development: No issues 
Endocrine: No issues 
Hematology: No issues 
 
PE: nondysmorphic adult male, cachectic appearence  
WT 49.4 kg      HT 177.8 cm   BMI 15.63 kg/m2 
HEENT: normocephalic, normal hair distribution, normally spaced eyes, normally set ears, 
normal nasal bridge, normal mouth, normal neck 
ABDOMEN: slightly distended 
EXTREMITIES: reduced muscle mass 
 
Assessment:  
Mr. Mickel is a 31yo male with a history of chronic GI issues including vomiting, abdominal pain 
and burning, nausea, delayed gastric emptying and low body weight. He has had extensive 
evaluation for his abdominal pain with no clear diagnosis. He has tried many medications to help 
with motility and pain, but has never had complete symptom relief. His weight has remained 
around 110lbs for most of his adult life and he is not able to gain more weight or muscle mass. He 
has had comprehensive genetic testing revealing for several variants of uncertain significance.  
 
Specifically, had had two variants of uncertain significance in his TTN gene, however given that 
he has had a normal cardiac evaluation including echo we think that these variants are most likely 
benign. The homozygous variants in ACADS are also likely benign given the lack of 
symptomology consisted with SCAD deficiency, however he has had a history of elevated 
ethylmalonic acid in the past and we plan to repeat metabolic labs.  
 
The ALDOB variants are interesting given Mr. Mickel’s history of vomiting, bloating, abdominal 
pain and failure to thrive, however, his lack of adverse reaction to sugar and minimal benefit from 
the HFI diet suggests that this is not his diagnosis either.  
 

Mitochondrial disease has also been suggested, however, Mr. Mickel’s constellation of features is 
not highly suggestive of a specific mitochondrial condition and molecular testing has been 
otherwise unremarkable.  
 
At this time, it remains unclear as to the etiology of Mr. Mickel’s GI issues, however, I am not 
convinced that there is an underlying genetic condition. Given his continued abdominal pain and 
very low weight I think reanalysis of the exome data is worthwhile and I am also recommending 
a consultation with our nutritionist. If reanalysis is negative, I think an underlying genetic 
condition is unlikely and would not recommend any additional genetic testing.  
 
Plan: 

1.  Reanalysis of raw exome sequencing data from GeneDx – Mr. Mickel has the files and 

will ship these to us, once we receive the files TAT is ~6-9 weeks. 

2.  Metabolic labs: LFTs, Lactate, pyruvate, serum amino acids, acylcarnitine, free and total 

carnitine, and urine oganic acids 

3.  Will arrange consultation with our nutritionist via Skype 
4.  Prescription for metabolic labs during crisis 

 
Case reviewed with the genetic counselor.  I spent 2 hours educating the patient and family, 
collecting and reviewing records, and coordinating care.  I spent > 50% of that time counseling 
the patient and coordinating care.  The counseling included education about genetics, genetic 
diagnoses, and implications of a genetic diagnosis.  The care coordination involved coordination 
of genetic testing and communicating with the other providers about the current diagnosis and our 
plans for genetic evaluation. 
 
I thank you very much for letting the DISCOVER Program for Undiagnosed Diseases participate 
in this patient’s care. We will be in touch with the patient as results become available. Should you 
or the patient have any questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to call.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Wendy Chung, MD, PhD 
Kennedy Family Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine 
Division of Clinical Genetics 
Columbia University Medical Center 
 

